Bank for more than 143 years providing banking products and services to Brazos Valley citizens.
Gratefully acknowledging the veterans who served our country in the past and proudly supporting the soldiers who currently serve in our military.
First National Bank, first, last, always.
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbyville.
Dick Davidson does not dwell on the ribbons and medals that passed him by for his service in World War II.
As you will discover, PFC Davidson was a soldier not looking for recognition.
He was a fighter, simply looking to defeat the German enemy.
A ground soldier, and as he'll admit, an independent thinker who didn't always go along with the conventional ways.
What he saw along the way is incredible, an incredible story, and he's here to tell it.
Dick Davidson, it is a pleasure to have you here.
And we've got a long story to tell about your service in World War II.
And let's start with you as a young man, 16 years old, I believe.
You upped and then went to VMI.
So you were a young, young man when you sort of started this journey of service.
Yeah, really, I joined the Home Guard when I was 16 there in Marlin, Texas, where I was born and grew up.
And then as soon as I graduated from high school, barely 17, I went off to Virginia Military Institute, where I finished a year at what they called a gross rat.
That was a messy rat.
Rats for freshmen in Virginia Military.
Then I joined the reserves.
And I did this so that I could participate in what they called the Army Specialized Reserve Training Program.
which was military again, but it was at Baylor this time, and I finished a quarter there, but in the meantime, I had become 18 years old on the 3rd of April, and on the 13th of May, 40 days later, I was inducted into the Army at Camp Walters up here at Mineral Wells, Texas.
Right, and then you went to Camp Walters, and then you went to Alabama for training, is that right?
Yeah, Fort McClellan, Alabama, where I did the conventional and 17 weeks of infantry basic,
where they wasted time on close order drill, bayonet practice, and military courtesy to do the most difficult and dangerous job in the world.
We talked a little bit about how you didn't always agree with the conventional ways, and this is an example of it.
You told me that close order drill has nothing to do with fighting a war.
Neither does a bayonet.
I used it to open cans.
But look, I have a rifle that will shoot eight rounds as fast as I pull the trigger, and I can reload in two or three seconds.
What do I need with a bayonet?
Anyway, I finished that and I did not go right overseas like most of the men because I was still 18.
And they were trying to give 18 year olds a little bit delay.
So after a 10-day, what they call a delay in route, I was sent to Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri, where the 70th Division was just getting ready to go overseas.
So I had a few weeks with them.
Then we shipped out, went to Boston, where after a few days there, we were loaded on what once was a luxury liner.
It was the USS America.
Very fine, fast ship.
They had a whole battalion of us in what used to be the luxury lounge.
we had aisles about this deep to put all our gear in and we slept four deep on bunks about this wide so they had i think something like eight or ten thousand soldiers on that boat and how long was the trip nine days and we went all by ourselves it was a fast ship and they thought it on that southern route that they probably wouldn't have any trouble with sun with submarines but destroyer picked us up outside of gibraltar and escorted us through gibraltar and into the mediterranean
And then a day or two later, we landed in Marseille.
And incidentally, we landed on the 15th of December, 1944, that would be.
And the Battle of the Bulge started on the 16th of December, 1944.
The very next day.
I want to go back to your first joining the 70th Infantry Division and what we talked about sometimes you not being going along with the conventional way.
You had an assistant squad leader that you didn't see eye to eye with.
I would call it really a vendetta.
We not only didn't get along, we saw how much misery we could deal each other.
Now you might think that I wouldn't have much chance against a sergeant, but what I discovered was if you can make things miserable for them because you cannot demote a private and you can't court-martial anyone for being stupid.
So I had him pulling out his hair all the time.
But anyway, what happened was, is after we landed in France, they put us on the boxcar and shipped us up to Alsace, where the 7th Army was.
Far from the bulge, by the way.
And we marched up to the front one dark night with the guns flashing in the distance, but we didn't actually go to the front.
And the next day or the day after, the captain called us out.
And he gave us this little talk.
He said, men, I really hoped we were going to all go into battle together.
But you know, they're having a lot of trouble up north and they need some replacements.
And so we ordered to send a bunch of men up there.
I knew I would be selected.
So I hurried back, and by the time the assistant squad leader got there to tell me I'd been selected, I was already packed up and ready to go.
So I never let him win a single one.
He was as happy about that as you were.
We were both happy.
Both happy about that.
So anyway, they loaded us on an open truck in the dead of winter.
And for about 16 hours, including nearly all night in sub-freezing weather, we rode in that truck.
And by the time we got up there in Luxembourg, it was so cold that we were numb.
But fortunately, they took us to this castle.
And the castle was warm.
Now, we had to sleep on the marble floor, but it was really wonderful.
And we slept there during the night.
And the next day, we came out to be sent to our respective units, because we were replacements to replace the rather enormous casualties that had been suffered in the Battle of the Bulge.
Right, right.
So you were in the 2nd Battalion, 318th Infantry.
Yeah, but let me tell you how that happened, though.
That's fascinating.
That's one of my favorite stories, by the way.
We came out, and there was just hundreds of men, just to go in this one division, hundreds and hundreds of men.
A captain stood up on the hood of the jeep and started calling out names.
And after quite a while of doing this, he stopped, and he said, the rest of you men are in the 2nd Battalion, 318th Infantry.
We looked around and there was a battalion standing there.
Obviously that battalion had just been almost annihilated.
And so one poor guy held up his hand and he said, Captain, what are our chances?
The captain looked at him and said, most of our casualties are lightly wounded.
And what he was saying was, not if you get it, but when you get it, there's a pretty good chance it won't be too bad.
I mean, that's relative, of course, but it means that it won't be life-threatening or maiming, or that you won't be killed.
actually about 20% of our casualties were killed.
And really, probably a good half, or what you would call lightly wounded, in the sense that the person could spend a few weeks or a month or two in the hospital, and then he'd have the luxury of being sent back to the front again.
And boy, that was awful then, because you knew what you were getting into.
Now, you were in Company G, I believe.
Company G. And this was a company that, if I remember you telling me right, had been the company that was the first to land at Bastogne.
Is that right?
Actually, my whole battalion.
In fact, we got a presidential citation after the war was over for this.
They broke through to Bastogne.
And my particular company had been just decimated.
Out of 120 riflemen full strength, there were about 20 left.
I think a full strength platoon is 40 men, and I think my platoon had maybe five.
And they pumped 30, along with me, about 30 replacements came in.
None of us knew each other.
For that reason,
I call us band of strangers, not band of brothers.
And this is really typical.
People don't know this, but for an infantry unit that's been in battle for quite a while, this is typical.
The casualties are so heavy that most of the men don't really know each other.
They come up as strangers, and you don't even know that you want to get to know them very well because chances are either you or they are going to be gone in a few days or weeks.
See, I lost...
Three foxhole buddies in two months.
And of that, really only about six weeks was hard fighting.
Right.
And I lost three.
I was on my fourth when my turn came.
Right.
Because I was lucky.
I didn't get wounded.
We'll talk about that.
You were a rifleman, but you were on what is regarded as the front of this operation, of this battle.
One of my great prides, Tom, is that many, many times when I and the men next to me took one step forward or crawled one yard on our bellies, the power of the United States advanced one yard because there was nothing between us and the enemy.
That was true time and time and time again.
Indeed.
Yeah.
Wow.
You said that at this time, initially, you were at a relatively quiet part of the Battle of the Bulge.
Yeah.
But then you said pretty much all you did is dug trenches and get shell.
To me, that's not quiet.
Well, it is from infantry.
You see what had happened?
We'd been so decimated, having to digest all those troops, that they did put us on what was a relatively quiet part of the southern flank of the bulge, nearer city of Edelbrook, Luxembourg.
And that is basically what we did for 17, 18 days.
We did locate them in about three different positions.
In fact, one, two, three, four.
We actually were in four separate positions.
But during that time, I only knew of one man that was killed.
He was dug in.
turned out dug in under a tree, and a German shell hit the tree, and a shell fragment came down in the hole and killed him.
But that's the only man that I know of that was killed.
But let me tell you how you get after a while.
Before that 17 or 18 days was over, I began to welcome the shelling at night because it was required that in each foxhole one man stay on guard all night long.
So we took turns.
In case the German showed up, he would wake all up and down the front.
But if they were shelling you, you knew the Germans weren't going to show up because they would be out in the open, you in a hole, so they would be in much more danger than you were.
Right.
So I could sleep.
Exactly.
So when they were shelling you, you could sleep.
How do you like that one?
It doesn't make much sense.
You got waked up pretty often.
Every time there was a close one, you generally... I'm sure it made sense at the time.
You told a story, and I'll let you retell it, and we'll be delicate about it, but one of your first experiences with incoming fire...
was when you had a bad meal and nature called.
Right.
I had a bad meal of which we got many because the cooks brought up filthy food for us.
In fact, we got well when we didn't eat their cooking.
Right.
But anyway, nature called and I jumped out of my hole and only ran a hole just no farther than halfway across this room, you know.
And I got done, and I headed back to my hole, and just as I jumped in, whaow, bam, and hit came a shell, landed right by our hole.
And I know he only fired one time, so I was the target.
You were the sole target of that German artillery.
I was the sole target.
Yeah, most people don't have that honor.
Most infantrymen don't have the honor of attracting enemy artillery fire.
But I know what happened.
This guy's sitting over there bored and needed some entertainment, and he found a target all of a sudden.
But it takes time to call it in and get the range, and by then, by the time the shell got there, I got back to my hole at just about the same time.
We moved past the new year into 1945 around mid-January 18th or 19th.
Your unit decided or your leaders decided to attack a German town just to pick a fight.
Talk about this.
That is, I think that was insane.
We were not given any information.
Now the platoon leader may have been, but here I am getting ready to attack a town at night and I don't know what the street layout is.
I don't know anything.
And here we are, going to go over there and pick a fight.
That's just asking to be mangled.
Well, it turned out we got mangled without picking a fight.
What happened is, we're heading across no man's land, snow about this deep, and all of a sudden, about as far as here to that ladder, no farther than that, suddenly, right in front of me, boom!
I was so close that powder from it stung my face.
I hit the ground.
I heard this poor kid right beside me, about this far, gurgling what turned out to be his last breaths.
I didn't know it at the time, but my foxhole buddy, who was about as far behind as, again, 8 or 10 feet or 15 feet maybe, had been hitting the leg and wounded.
But I didn't know what it was.
That's how little they had taught me in basic training.
I didn't realize it was a mine.
I thought maybe it was a shell, though I should have realized that there was no whistle.
Anyway, I lay there with my face in the snow and somebody else apparently panicked and started running because it was blam, blam, blam.
And that was it.
Well, somebody said, let's get out of here.
And I stood up, and I was going to go forward.
And fortunately, somebody saved my neck and said, those are mines.
So I turned around and started backtracking out.
Well, so many men had been wounded.
I think we had 35 on the patrol, and 21 had been killed or wounded.
That we could not even carry all the wounded back.
I helped my wounded foxhole buddy back.
It took two men to carry the company exec back, who had both legs riddled.
The company commander, I mean the squad commander,
The platoon commander, the second lieutenant, had been killed.
I think the guy that kicked the thing off in front of me had had both of his legs blown off.
That was not, some of them were Bouncing Betty's, but that was not.
It was Bouncing Betty, by the way.
It's like a fireworks.
It explodes, it throws it up in the air about this high, and then it explodes.
And it's much more dangerous up here than on the ground.
But the one that I saw was not a bedding.
So anyway, we got back, and maybe there were 14 or 15 survivors.
Not all were dead by any means.
Actually, mostly were wounded, some dead.
But out of 35 men, about, maybe 36, there were only about 14 of us left.
Two other guys crawled in my hole that night, and both of them had lost their foxhole buddy.
One of them lay in the bottom of the hole and cried that he couldn't take it anymore, and he deserted the next day.
We didn't know when he took off.
The other one, who became my next foxhole buddy, just lay in the bottom and slept.
He was so tired, and I stood guard all night.
And you had to be beyond exhausted.
Right.
Well, the next morning, they decided to take us back into Edelbrook, which was just a mile or two away for a little rest.
And I got sort of tickled by this.
A lieutenant met us.
And all of a sudden, he said, well, where's the rest of the platoon?
And about three men spoke up at once, each one knowing what it was.
what reaction they were going to get from the lieutenant.
He said, this is the second platoon.
And sure enough, we got a stunned look on the face of the lieutenant, which everyone enjoys.
It's amazing, really, that infantrymen take a certain pride in survival.
Because it's quite difficult to survive, it turns out.
Indeed.
Whenever I've talked to anybody who fought in or around the Battle of the Bulge, the first thing they always talk about is the weather, is about how cold it was.
And most of them have a hard time really putting into words exactly how brutal the weather was.
And I know that soon after this, you were on an offensive, I guess the southern flank of the Battle of the Bulge.
That's right.
We were caving in the southern flank of the Bulge.
And in a blinding blizzard.
A blinding blizzard.
Right.
It was so cold, it must have been zero at least.
And the wind blowing 44 miles an hour and snow whipping around.
And we headed off in the middle of that blinding blizzard
walking in snow that was probably up to your knees, which exhausts you so much.
But another interesting thing happened.
You know, some of the great battles, if you study history, are won when you do what the enemy doesn't think you've done.
Like MacArthur at Incheon, he landed where the tide was 30 feet.
And he caught him totally by surprise in one of the greatest battles in US military history.
Well, that night we won a small victory.
It was small, but it was for the same reason.
We had a patrol out on our left flank.
And they literally fell in practically to a German machine gun position, but they were all asleep.
And so on that blizzard, they were all down there sleeping, saying, these idiots aren't going to come out in this night.
So we took a prison.
We had a boy in the company that spoke fluent German.
He was a German boy.
And he got over there, and I don't know what he was telling them, but I guarantee you he wasn't paying any attention to the Geneva Convention.
because those guys talked.
They were not tortured.
They were probably threatened, though.
And they told him that the rest of the men, there was a woods over off the road, and they told him,
that there would probably be a platoon in there.
So we sent one or two of them in there to tell them that they had a whole bunch of Americans, hundreds of Americans surrounding that woods, and they better come out or it was going to be too bad.
By golly, they did.
So we had basically, it turns out they were retreating.
They had fallen back a few miles.
And they had left this rear guard.
So we had basically wiped out their rear guard without firing a shot.
And so we were able to head down this road towards the town of
of Borscheid, which was our objective, and almost get there without seeing a single German in the snowstorm.
In fact, at one time we saw some rocket launches, German rocket launches, firing back from where we came from.
They were on another hill actually shooting towards our rear, where we had already left.
But what happened was, just about dawn, all of a sudden, burp gun.
By the way, you can tell from the speed of the firing whether it's American or German weapon.
The German weapon's fired twice as fast as the American weapon.
So burp, I know it's a burp gun.
Some guy comes running back that we've run into a German patrol.
So we just all dash forward as fast as we can.
In G Company, we were in the front, I believe, and the first and third platoons immediately attack.
Since we have so few men, we're bringing up the rear.
And we head down this hill.
It's a slope leading down to the town.
in knee-deep snow moving as fast as we can been up all night walking and uh hadn't had much sleep before that and i'll admit i wasn't moving real fast yes sir and all of a sudden pop and somehow i kicked in my afterburners
Nothing like a little bullet popping by your head.
The next one may be in your head.
To give you a burst of energy.
And I started moving faster than I thought I had strength to move.
So I moved down this hill.
I passed a house on my left.
And suddenly I realized there was just one guy with me.
Yes, sir.
And I stopped.
I did a very stupid thing.
Again, I'm still green.
For maybe 15 or 20 seconds, I just stood there trying to figure out what to do.
And all of a sudden, I realized that about one more second or two more seconds, and I'm going to go to the other place.
Right.
Because I am a target.
Well, there was a little hedgerow, no more than five
yards in front of me, so I just dashed down.
That head rose about this tall.
I dashed down and threw myself behind it.
Just as I did, I saw two guys in the first wave entering the city, and it was still dark enough that I could see the flame coming out of their rifles.
I still have that picture in my mind of those two guys pumped over, bumping those bullets out as they went into the city.
Well, I looked around, and suddenly I realized that this guy who had been with me had not moved when I did, so he was still a target.
And as I turned around to yell at him to get down where I was, and just as I did, he let out a grunt and fell and never moved.
He must have been shot right through the heart.
He was dead just like that.
Well, I took another look at this house, and I realized that there was a place there that looked like a back porch.
Funny looking place, but it had some other soldiers on it.
I don't know why they weren't inside, but they were there.
So I got up and dashed over there and discovered very quickly that it was not a back porch.
It was just a little area that jutted out, and it was where they stored junk.
Well, it didn't jut out.
It was carved into the house like that, into the corner of the house.
But there was just two walls.
There was no door.
So I immediately got behind a pile of junk like the other five or six guys were.
And just as I did, a hail of bullets came in.
It was a shower of bullets.
In fact...
Sawdust started dripping down on my head from the bullets whacking right above my head.
And about that time, my new foxhole buddy, a guy named Pittus, I remember his name, the only one I remember well.
John Pittus was his name.
He was another college student.
Maybe that's why I remember him.
He was a young man that went to Ohio State.
He yelled, do something, do something.
I said, what's the matter?
He said, they put two bullets through this table I'm under.
So I've raised my head up.
And I very quickly saw that there was a house over on the edge of town with some big windows, and they probably were firing out of those windows.
So I just screamed at the top of my boys, fire at those windows.
And most of the guys did.
We just sent a hail of bullets into those windows, and the German fire stopped just like you'd cut off a faucet.
All of a sudden, those guys had bullets popping over their heads.
And I imagine when those bullets went inside that room and bounced off the wall, it was pretty scary.
So I suspect they got out of there in a hurry.
So anyway, we then ran around the
to get into the front of the house, because you had to run around the corner to get in.
I didn't see this, another guy told me, but I brought up the rear, and he told me that just as I went around the corner, a German machine gun riddled up the wall right behind me.
But I was so hard running, turning the corner that I did not see this.
So we got inside the house, and once inside the house, there was nothing to do.
Obviously there was a machine gun out there.
So I sat down against the wall and got my breakfast out and started eating my breakfast.
Well, we hadn't been there very long when all of a sudden the tanks were supposed to support us, but they couldn't keep up because of the snow.
Yes, sir.
And one of them arrived on the opposite side of town, and apparently somebody was shooting out of the window of the house, and he saw that fire and thought we were German.
So this American tank promptly slams a shell into the house we're in.
Fortunately, it hit the other side of the house.
Blew a hole about that big it's all because the walls were this thick and stone and brick.
So they really were little forts.
It took a cannon to blow the wall in, really.
And it only blew a hole this big.
But the poor old captain, he ran in yelling, somebody do something, somebody do something.
But the guy had his radio operator with him, and so the radio operator got hold of the tank.
We didn't get hit by any more shells, fortunately.
But what was funny, though, this is an 18-year-old talking, so please forgive me, everyone.
You've got to remember I was a smart, alecky 18-year-old.
Yes, sir.
This other soldier looked at me.
I was just sat through all of this, shell and everything.
I was eating my breakfast.
I just never even bothered.
And this guy looked at me.
How can you eat at a time like this?
Might as well die with a full stomach, I said.
You were a smart aleck.
No, not a bit.
Totally for effect, of course.
Just my little way of bragging.
There is a lot to Dick Davison's story, as you can imagine, and that's why we're going to continue with Dick Davison next week.
We've just got a few minutes left on this show because there are facets to his service that you're really going to want to hear about.
I want to...
In next week's show, we're going to be talking about after the war was over, you had gone to the hospital.
We're going to talk about how you nearly lost your feet because of the cold.
But eventually, you actually were at Nuremberg.
Yeah, I was.
And there's a photograph that you've supplied to us, I think, at that time when you were at Nuremberg that I want to show the folks right now.
And you can sort of tell us about that.
We'll show it again next week.
There it is right there on the screen.
Talk about what we're looking at there.
You're on the left, by the way.
Yeah, I'm the guy over here on the left.
And one of my jobs, well, I had three jobs, basically.
One of them was to clean the bathrooms, of which there were 30.
The other one was to police the grounds, picking up all the paper.
And the third was to take the trash to the dump.
And this is the third.
And that guy, you can see, he's a PW.
He's an SS trooper.
And we went out every morning and collected these guys.
And they did the actual labor.
We just guarded them.
So here I am with a couple of my comrades and
We posed for this picture while the prisoner of war that you can see in the background was shoveling the paper out of the back of the truck.
An interesting thing about this, by the way, was a lot of this trash was coming down from the war crime trials.
And so on the way out, I got to read what was going on up in the courthouse.
And it was very fascinating, really.
Right, because you were actually living at the courthouse.
I was living in the courthouse when they were trying Gary and all those other big shots.
You bet.
That's a fascinating part of history.
I've got another picture, I believe.
This is after your service, just to see what young Dick Davison looked like.
I'm about 23 here, by the way.
About 23 years old.
So this was about the time, I don't think we mentioned that you, after the war, you came back.
You went to Texas Tech.
That's where you graduated.
So this is about, you looked like about a college senior.
About the time I graduated.
Yeah, that might have been a graduation picture, for all I know, but it was about that time.
Yeah.
Sharp-looking young man there.
Indeed.
Again, we're going to continue this next week.
But Dick, you have talked so much about being under fire in World War II and being kind of a cool customer during all of this.
What were your thoughts back then?
You must have thought as you saw these soldiers dying around you that any time could be your time.
What do you recall were your thoughts back then?
Because you were still a young man, hopefully with a long life to live.
Actually, it turns out that I would probably be more afraid now when I'm in my old age and sick and probably don't have many years left.
I think I'd be more afraid now than I was then because I'm so much smarter now.
That's why I think they fight wars with young men for two reasons.
One, they are foolhardy.
And two, they're physically fit and strong and they have fast reflexes.
And so they can actually duck and move and so forth.
But you know, of course I knew I could be killed.
And you play games with yourself.
My own game was to... I have a mathematical mind, so I'd look at it statistically.
And I would say, well, this will probably not be the day.
It may come, but it won't be today.
There's a good chance it will not be today.
And sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.
Those days continued that they were today.
And we're going to talk more about it next week.
Thanks for visiting with us.
Dick Davison's story of service in World War II's European theater is one of those that can't be told in just 30 minutes.
So it will continue next week.
He'll talk about those foxhole buddies that he lost, his own close calls, his life after World War II,
and about Operation Keelhaul.
That's a story tough to tell.
We thank Dick Davison for his service, and we thank all veterans.
Please join us next week.
I'm Tom Turbyville.
For Dick Davison, this is Veterans of the Valley.
you
Veterans of the Valley is proudly funded by the First National Bank for more than 143 years providing banking products and services to Brazos Valley citizens.
Gratefully acknowledging the veterans who served our country in the past,